All right guys, welcome back to the course.
Let's get acquainted with HTML.
What is HTML?
Well, contrary to HBO's show Silicon Valley,
it does not stand for How To Meet Ladies,
which ironically could not be farther from the truth.
What it does stand for is HyperText Markup Language.
Let's have a history lesson, shall we?
And interestingly enough, that phrase, HyperText Markup Language,
it actually tells us a lot about where this language came from
and what it was when it was originally made.
Remember how when we talked
about how the internet originally started,
we said that at the very beginning, it was primarily
used in academia for sharing research and information.
That's actually where HTML originally came from.
Transferring text for research worked great, until it didn't,
and people started looking for ways of
increasing the efficiency of sharing research.
The first effort to do this was to create a technology
we learned about before, called HyperText Transfer Protocol.
Remember, that's the HTTP you put in your
browser every single time you go to a website.
The idea was that with this protocol people could then use HyperLinks
and easily embed within documents links to other documents.
Raise your hand if you thought that
the official term for links was "links."
You're wrong, it's actually HyperLinks.
"Hyper" in this case just refers to the fact that, back in time,
when they created this, people actually
thought it was extra or special.
Remember, this was a while ago.
Once researchers used these and figured
out how to link to other documents,
the next thing they needed to satisfy
was their overwhelming craving to markup
text they were given with highlights,
and underlining, formatting, bolding,
and, you know, the big red marker
that says F with a circle around it.
And from the technology that was used to create
HyperLinks, we had an extension which became HTML.
Yes, wow, now go and amaze your friends
with that amazing piece of information.
But why exactly is that helpful to know?
Well, first off, you need to understand that HTML
is by far the simplest web language you can learn
and it's included in virtually every single website out there.
You can learn it, I'd say, easily within 2-3 days.
If you had to sum up what HTML does,
it's exactly what we just learned from that story.
It's used as the language to insert text, insert an image, a table,
a link, a button, and then assign attributes to that object.
If I typed out "I will give Evan five stars for this course,"
I could use what's called an HTML tag
around that text and that tag
would make it underlined just by putting the little alligator,
then a "u," then the other alligator.
Then I'd have to close it off by putting yet another alligator
with a "u" but this time with a slash in front of it, which designates that
I'm ending the request to underline this text.
Anything in between these two
special characters should be underlined.
So that's one tag you can use in HTML, and guess what?
There's only roughly about 142 different tags you can add.
You know, one took four seconds, so
how long could it take to learn the rest?
If I wanted to say on the screen "How do you do"
in huge font with a line break in between the middle,
I would put inside those alligators "h1," which means header,
basically it says what the size of the font should be,
then I type "How do", and then I put "br" inside of two alligators,
"br" for line break, that's what it tells it to do,
then "you do", then I close it out by
putting "h1" inside the alligator brackets,
but this time with a slash in front of it, saying this is the end
of the text that we should make the size of what's called header 1.
So that's it. Add something to the page, and
then use tags to modify the way it displays.
You can use this to create lists, create form input fields,
put header text on the screen, format a paragraph, you could
break up a paragraph, anything you
could probably do in a word processor.
Since HTML was made for marking up research papers,
it has for the most part stayed that way,
and hence why it's the easiest language to learn.
True story, when I was 11 years old,
I started selling things on Ebay,
and my secret was that I could use HTML
to make my Ebay pages have fancy colors,
or display rainbows, or funny images, or
text that vibrates and shines, and all that stuff.
Now, that's the perfect example of what to use HTML for.
Hey, it's a big block of text, how can I make this block of text
look like something other than a block of text?
For the sticklers out there, it's worth
pointing out that HTML is not technically
considered a programming language,
because it doesn't really give or allow you
to create complex instructions, really
what it allows you to do is the same stuff
you could do in what's called a Rich Text Editor.
You know when you're writing a comment on a box,
say you're writing an angry comment
on YouTube, it should give you
the ability to add bold, or underline,
or just change the size of the font.
That there basically summarizes HTML - the function,
not what you're actually saying in the comment.
Now, keep in mind, HTML has come a long, long way.
We're currently using HTML5, which has
quite a few new increased capabilities.
Now, the new version of HTML is way different than the original,
and this new version is designed to let you
embed pretty much anything you want into a page,
like music, videos, and even games.
This is something that the original
HTML never even dreamed of doing.
In the in-between years between HTML original and HTML5,
we actually saw a whole lot of different things coming to the language,
and we saw that the language can do some crazy stuff.
One thing, for example, that HTML learned how to do was
how to pull code into the page that it's in, or the document,
from other documents that are on the same web server.
Now, this concept of pulling code or including
it is something that's crucial to understand
if you ever do decide to go on and learn
the next language we're going to talk about,
which is CSS, because without that ability to include code
within the main code that's being displayed on the browser,
CSS wouldn't exactly have a point.
All right, that's a sufficient cliffhanger.
I'll see you guys in the next lecture!